# Criminal indent

Freud once classified sexual actions the purpose of which is not the
insemination but the actions themselves, as perversions. Don't get it
wrong though: he wasn't being prudish, just making a point about human
sexuality in one of his discourses.

Just like humans are given "equipment" to achieve their ultimate
biological purpose, programmers are given the tab key and the ASCII
code 9 to achive the purpose of skipping several spaces to the next tab
stop.

But do humans pursue their biological purpose directly and with minimal
action? Evidently, no. Great amounts of time are spent (with great
pleasure, hopefully) on doing things not really intended for
accomplishing "the task". Likewise, great amounts of time are spent on
going to the next tab stop with spaces. But this is where the analogy
diverges: if doing strange things in bedroom may be fun, what is the
fun in spaces instead of tabs?

Now, Freud probably didn't want to take sides and tag people as
deviants and pursue them. Technically, kissing is a perversion, but it
is almost universally accepted. So is indenting with spaces, so go
ahead and space away, why don't you. But tabs seem to be a taboo in many programmer cultures now.

Whereas social cultures put a taboo on practices considered "deviant"
because they don't immediately serve the purpose, coder cultures have
put the taboo on a practice conceived by gods of programming: the logic
and the least action principle. Imagine a taboo in society on having
vanilla sex, only perverse kinds are allowed! How strange is that?

Same kind of folk who may scold a secretary for using spaces to make
indents in a Word document, use spaces to make indents in their program
code. Some are even using spacebar like that secretary. Others find an
editor that catches the tab key presses and replaces them with
appropriate amount of space key events. Some even program this
behaviour themselves, but under no circumstances will they use the
direct approach.

As being a lawyer was probably respectable a long time ago, so was being
a programmer. Nowadays programmer cultures are opinionated and hostile
to the point where the weak (psychologically) are pushed out because of
minutia like the way to skip several spaces.

How screwed up is that?
